bpo-41805: Documentation for PEP 585 (#22615)
python/cpython: Doc/library/stdtypes.rst

Compared to the overhead of setting up the runtime context, the overhead of a
single class dictionary lookup is negligible.

.. _types-genericalias:

Generic Alias Type
==================

.. index::
   object: GenericAlias
   pair: Generic; Alias

Most of the time, the :ref:`subscription expression <subscriptions>` calls the
:term:`method` :meth:`__getitem__` of an :term:`object`. However, the
subscription of a :term:`class` itself calls the :func:`classmethod

> <classmethod>` :meth:`__class_getitem__` of the class instead. The classmethod

Reviewer: I don't think you need to cross-link "method" or "object", nor "class" or "classmethod". (And honestly, instead of crosslinking "subscription expression", giving an example `x[y]` would be more helpful.)

> :meth:`__class_getitem__` returns a ``GenericAlias`` object.

Reviewer: This is not always true -- it is really up to the class what this method returns (or if it even exists). But for builtin container classes like list it is indeed the case.

Also, if this method isn't present but the metaclass has a `__getitem__`, that gets called. We shouldn't imply otherwise. (Details in PEP 560.)

The ``GenericAlias`` object acts as a proxy for :term:`generic types
<generic type>`, implementing *parameterized generics* - a specific instance

> of a generic with the types for container elements provided. It is intended

Reviewer: Passive tense here makes this sound more complicated than it is. Perhaps this?

```suggestion
of a generic which provides the types for container elements. It is intended
```

primarily for type :term:`annotations <annotation>`.  ``GenericAlias`` objects

> are created by expressions like ``list[int]``.

Reviewer: I would mention this example at the top of the section, to give people an idea of what it is about.

> The type for the ``GenericAlias`` object is :data:`types.GenericAlias`.

Reviewer: This sounds like a tautology. Maybe say it can be imported this way?

.. impl-detail::

   The C equivalent of :meth:`__getitem__` - :c:func:`PyObject_GetItem` - is
   called first for builtin classes and types. When :c:func:`PyObject_GetItem`
   detects that it was called on a type, it then calls :meth:`__class_getitem__`

>    and returns the ``GenericAlias`` object.

Reviewer: Do we need this? Other uses of `impl-detail` still are about things that are visible to the end user.

.. describe:: generic[X, Y, ...]

   Defines a generic containing elements of types *X*, *Y*, and more depending

>    on the *generic* used.  For example, for a function expecting a :class:`list`

Reviewer: Using "generic" as a noun feels confusing. Also the form `GT[X, Y]` doesn't *define* anything; it is just an operation on types. The example you give is much more helpful.

   containing :class:`float` elements::

      def average(values: list[float]) -> float:
          return sum(values) / len(values)

   Another example for :term:`mapping` objects, using a :class:`dict`.  In this

>    case, the function expects a ``dict`` for its ``body`` argument. The ``body``

Reviewer: Perhaps clarify that `dict` is a generic type with two parameters, the key type and the value type.

   has keys of type :class:`str` and their corresponding values are lists which
   hold :class:`int` elements::

      def send_post_request(url: str, body: dict[str, list[int]]) -> None:
          ...

The builtin functions :func:`isinstance` and :func:`issubclass` do not accept

> parameterized generic types for their second argument::

Reviewer: Maybe instead of "parameterized generic types" write GenericAlias?

   >>> isinstance([1, 2], list[str])
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: isinstance() argument 2 cannot be a parameterized generic
   >>>
   >>> issubclass(list, list[str])
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: issubclass() argument 2 cannot be a parameterized generic

> The Python runtime does not enforce type :term:`annotations <annotation>`.

Reviewer: I'd include `type` in the label for the link, so it reads "...enforce **type annotations**" instead of "...enforce type **annotations**" (the latter misplaces the emphasis in the sentence).

Same for an earlier occurrence of the same phrase.

This extends to generic types and their type parameters. When creating
an object from a parameterized generic, container elements are not checked
against their type. For example, the following code is discouraged, but will
run without errors::

   >>> t = list[str]
   >>> t([1, 2, 3])
   [1, 2, 3]

Furthermore, parameterized generics erase type parameters during object
creation::

   >>> t = list[str]
   >>> type(t)
   <class 'types.GenericAlias'>
   >>>
   >>> l = t()
   >>> type(l)
   <class 'list'>

> Calling :func:`repr` on a generic shows the parameterized type::

Reviewer: Or `str`, actually. :-)

   >>> repr(list[int])
   'list[int]'

The :meth:`__getitem__` method of generics will raise an exception to disallow
mistakes like ``dict[str][str]``::

   >>> dict[str][str]
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: There are no type variables left in dict[str]

> However, that syntax is valid when type variables are used::

Reviewer: Can you rewrite this sentence without referring to syntax? It's not a syntactic issue -- the rule is that a GenericAlias may only be indexed if it has type variables, and the index must have as many elements as there are items in its `__args__`.

   >>> from typing import TypeVar
   >>> T = TypeVar('T')
   >>> dict[str, T][int]
   dict[str, int]

Standard Generic Collections
----------------------------

These standard library collections support parameterized generics.  Most of

> their type parameters can be found in the :mod:`typing` module:

Reviewer: What do you mean by the second sentence? That you need to read the docs for `typing` to find out how many parameters each of these has and whether they are invariant or covariant?

Author: Your interpretation is correct. Should I place a table for such information instead?

* :class:`collections.abc.ByteString`
* :class:`collections.abc.MappingView`
* :class:`collections.abc.KeysView`
* :class:`collections.abc.ItemsView`
* :class:`collections.abc.ValuesView`
* :class:`contextlib.AbstractContextManager`
* :class:`contextlib.AbstractAsyncContextManager`
* :ref:`re.Pattern <re-objects>`
* :ref:`re.Match <match-objects>`

Special Attributes of Generic Alias
-----------------------------------

All parameterized generics implement special read-only attributes.

.. attribute:: genericalias.__origin__

   This attribute points at the non-parameterized generic class::

      >>> list[int].__origin__
      <class 'list'>

.. attribute:: genericalias.__args__

   This attribute is a :class:`tuple` (possibly of length 1) of generic
   types passed to the original :meth:`__class_getitem__`
   of the generic container::

      >>> dict[str, list[int]].__args__
      (<class 'str'>, list[int])

.. attribute:: genericalias.__parameters__

   This attribute is a lazily computed tuple (possibly empty) of unique type
   variables found in ``__args__``::

      >>> from typing import TypeVar
      >>>
      >>> T = TypeVar('T')

>       >>> list[t].__parameters__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      >>> list[t].__parameters__
```
```suggestion
      >>> list[T].__parameters__
```

      (~T,)

> .. seealso::

Reviewer: Maybe also link to the explanation of generics in the docs for `typing`?

:data:`types.GenericAlias` and used for :func:`isinstance` checks.

.. describe:: T[X, Y, ...]

   Creates a ``GenericAlias`` representing a type ``T`` containing elements
   of types *X*, *Y*, and more depending on the ``T`` used.
   For example, a function expecting a :class:`list` containing
   :class:`float` elements::

      def average(values: list[float]) -> float:
          return sum(values) / len(values)

   Another example for :term:`mapping` objects, using a :class:`dict`, which
   is a generic type expecting two type parameters representing the key type
   and the value type.  In this case, the function expects a ``dict`` for its
   ``body`` argument.  The ``body`` has keys of type :class:`str` and their
   corresponding values are of type :class:`int`::

      def send_post_request(url: str, body: dict[str, int]) -> None:
          ...

The builtin functions :func:`isinstance` and :func:`issubclass` do not accept
``GenericAlias`` types for their second argument::

   >>> isinstance([1, 2], list[str])
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: isinstance() argument 2 cannot be a parameterized generic

> 
>    >>> issubclass(list, list[str])
>    Traceback (most recent call last):
>      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
>    TypeError: issubclass() argument 2 cannot be a parameterized generic

Reviewer: I think one example is sufficient.
```suggestion
```

   object: GenericAlias
   pair: Generic; Alias

``GenericAlias`` objects are created by subscripting a class (usually a
container), such as ``list[int]``.  They are intended primarily for
:term:`type annotations <annotation>`.

Usually, the :ref:`subscription <subscriptions>` of container objects calls the
method :meth:`__getitem__` of the object.  However, the subscription of some
containers' classes may call the classmethod :meth:`__class_getitem__` of the
class instead. The classmethod :meth:`__class_getitem__` should return a
``GenericAlias`` object.

.. note::
   If the :meth:`__getitem__` of the class' metaclass is present, it will take
   precedence over the :meth:`__class_getitem__` defined in the class (see

>    :pep:`560` for more details)::
> 
>       >>> class M(type):
>       ...     def __getitem__(self, key):
>       ...         print('__getitem__ was called')
> 
>       >>> class T(metaclass=M):
>       ...     def __class_getitem__(cls, key):
>       ...         print('__class_getitem__ was called')
> 
>       >>> T[int]
>       '__getitem__ was called'
> 

Reviewer: This doesn't require an example.
```suggestion
   :pep:`560` for more details).
```

The ``GenericAlias`` object acts as a proxy for :term:`generic types
<generic type>`, implementing *parameterized generics* - a specific instance
of a generic which provides the types for container elements.

The user-exposed type for the ``GenericAlias`` object can be accessed from
:data:`types.GenericAlias` and used for :func:`isinstance` checks.

.. describe:: T[X, Y, ...]

   Creates a ``GenericAlias`` representing a type ``T`` containing elements
   of types *X*, *Y*, and more depending on the ``T`` used.
   For example, a function expecting a :class:`list` containing
   :class:`float` elements::

      def average(values: list[float]) -> float:
          return sum(values) / len(values)

   Another example for :term:`mapping` objects, using a :class:`dict`, which
   is a generic type expecting two type parameters representing the key type

>    and the value type.  In this case, the function expects a ``dict`` for its
>    ``body`` argument.  The ``body`` has keys of type :class:`str` and their
>    corresponding values are of type :class:`int`::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   and the value type.  In this example, the function expects a ``dict`` with
   keys of type :class:`str` and values of type :class:`int`::
```

   object: GenericAlias
   pair: Generic; Alias

> Usually, the :ref:`subscription <subscriptions>` of builtin containers

Reviewer: There is nothing special about *builtin* containers. (In fact, unless you define "container" as "class with `__getitem__` method" there's nothing special about containers here.)

objects calls the method :meth:`__getitem__` of the object.  However, the
subscription of some builtin containers' classes may call the classmethod
:meth:`__class_getitem__` of the class instead. The classmethod
:meth:`__class_getitem__` returns a ``GenericAlias`` object. An example of this

> is the expression ``list[int]``.

Reviewer: I'd still like to see the example moved further to the front.

.. note::
   When :meth:`__class_getitem__` of the class is not present, the

>    :meth:`__getitem__` is still called.

Reviewer: This is just confusing, because it's the `__getitem__` of the *metaclass*.

The ``GenericAlias`` object acts as a proxy for :term:`generic types
<generic type>`, implementing *parameterized generics* - a specific instance
of a generic which provides the types for container elements.  It is intended
primarily for :term:`type annotations <annotation>`.

The user-exposed type for the ``GenericAlias`` object can be accessed from
:data:`types.GenericAlias` and used for :func:`isinstance` checks.

> .. describe:: GenericType[X, Y, ...]

Reviewer: It's not clear here that `GenericType` is just a "filler" name like "X" or "Y".

   Creates a ``GenericAlias`` representing a ``GenericType`` containing elements
   of types *X*, *Y*, and more depending on the ``GenericType`` used.
   For example, for a function expecting a :class:`list` containing
   :class:`float` elements::

      def average(values: list[float]) -> float:
          return sum(values) / len(values)

   Another example for :term:`mapping` objects, using a :class:`dict`. A

>    :class:`dict` is a generic type expecting two type parameters representing

Reviewer: The repetition feels ugly.
```suggestion
   Another example for :term:`mapping` objects, using a :class:`dict`,
   which is a generic type expecting two type parameters representing
```

   the key type and the value type.  In this case, the function expects a
   ``dict`` for its ``body`` argument.  The ``body`` has keys of type
   :class:`str` and their corresponding values are lists which hold :class:`int`

>    elements::

Reviewer: Honestly the example would be easier to follow if you just use something like `dict[str, int]`. We don't need to educate people about nesting generic types through this example.

     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: There are no type variables left in dict[str]

> However, that expression is valid when :ref:`type variables <generics>` are

Reviewer: Well, _that particular expression_ will never be valid, but other such expressions could be.
```suggestion
However, such expressions are valid when :ref:`type variables <generics>` are
```

> used.  ``GenericAlias`` can only be indexed if it has type variables.  The index

Reviewer: This sentence seems redundant.

used.  ``GenericAlias`` can only be indexed if it has type variables.  The index
must have as many elements as there are type variable items in the
``GenericAlias`` object's :attr:`__args__ <genericalias.__args__>`. ::

   >>> from typing import TypeVar
   >>> T = TypeVar('T')

>    >>> dict[str, T][int]

Reviewer: Maybe keep this example too? It is important because it shows you can have some type variables and some concrete types in the parameters.
